3.0.0 - 14th Aug. 2024
======================


.. contents::
        :local:
        :depth: 3



TYPO3 13 compatibility + Recipient group refactoring
----------------------------------------------------

- Add more possibilities to manipulate recipient groups using query restrictions on tables or extbase model based recipient sources
- Enhanced csv based recipient groups
- Exclude recipient groups

New features
------------

- Add RecipientsRestrictionEvent to manipulate querys of extbase model recipient sources. This way it is now possible to e.g. filter recipient lists coming from extbase.

  See here how to use:

  - https://gitlab.com/mediaessenz/additional-mail-recipients/-/blob/main/Configuration/Site/RecipientSources.yaml (recipientSources:male_tt_address)
  - https://gitlab.com/mediaessenz/additional-mail-recipients/-/blob/main/Classes/EventListener/AddressModelRestriction.php
  - https://gitlab.com/mediaessenz/additional-mail-recipients/-/blob/main/Configuration/Services.yaml

- Add possibility to define one or more query restrictions to manipulate table recipient sources. This way it is now possible to e.g. filter recipient lists coming from tables.

  See here how to use:

  - https://gitlab.com/mediaessenz/additional-mail-recipients/-/blob/main/Configuration/Site/RecipientSources.yaml (recipientSources:female_tt_address)
  - https://gitlab.com/mediaessenz/additional-mail-recipients/-/blob/main/Classes/Database/Query/Restriction/FemaleRestriction.php

- To make it possible to use a table more than once, a new recipient source confiiguration property `table` was added.
  If not set, the identifier is used as table name instead.

- The mail queue is now pausable. This opens the possibility to pause a running delivery to e.g. give another delivery priority.

- A new recipient group type "CSV" was added with additional configuration settings:

  - Type "Plain CSV" and "CSV from file"
  - Field separator
  - Field enclosure
  - First line contains field names, which makes it possible to use every field defined in the extension settings "defaultRecipientFields" or "additionalRecipientFields" as marker
  - CSV file as source (file must be UTF-8 encoded!)

- The last step of the Mail Wizard has been expanded to include a new “Exclude recipient groups” selection, which allows you to define one or more recipient groups
  that are to be to be excluded from a mailing. This makes it possible, for example, to exclude a few people from a larger list in order to prevent them from receiving a specific
  mailing. This list could be a plain list with just email addresses.

Breaking changes
----------------

- Recipient Source Configurations now uses the DTO `MEDIAESSENZ\Domain\Model\Dto\RecipientSourceConfigurationDTO`.

  Previously the getRecipientSourceConfiguration method of the following events returns an array:

  - ManipulateMarkersEvent
  - ManipulateRecipientEvent
  - DeactivateRecipientEvent

  Please adjust your event listeners to use e.g. `$recipientsSourceConfiguration->table` instead of `$recipientsSourceConfiguration->['table']`.
  There is also a `custom` property available to transfer custom yaml config into event listeners.

  .. code-block:: yaml
     mail:
       recipientSources:
         myCustomDataSource:
           custom:
             foo: bar

  This will be available as `$recipientsSourceConfiguration->custom['foo']` in an event listener.

- Plain Lists and CSV recipient groups are now different recipient group types. A migration wizard to convert from the old to new format comes with this version.
  Attention: Before using the migration wizard please do a database compare, but do **not** rename or remove the field "csv" in the first step!
  After the new fields "csv_type", "csv_data", "csv_separator" and "csv_file" have been generated, goto admin tools > upgrade and click on upgrade wizard.
  Here start the wizard with the title: "EXT:mail: Migrate mail group type plain to plain or new group csv, depending on csv type.".
  After this, you can safely delete the field "csv" from the mail database table.

- Mail records now have a status field, which can hold (currently) 5 different states:

  - 0 = DRAFT
  - 1 = SCHEDULED
  - 2 = SENDING
  - 3 = PAUSED
  - 4 = ABORTED
  - 5 = SENT

  There is an update wizard to convert existing mail records. Please do not delete the mail database field "sent" or rename it to "zzz_deleted_sent" before running it once.

  As a side effect, the backend module of the queue now only shows scheduled mails that have not yet been sent.
